.TH "lrzip.conf" "5" "January 2009, updated December 2022" "" ""
.SH "NAME"
lrzip.conf \- Configuration File for lrzip
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP
This file if used, will be read by the lrzip program\&, parsed\&,
and options passed to the program\&. Some options may be overridden
on the command line\&. Others are fixed\&.
.PP
The configuration file must be called \fBlrzip\&.conf\fP\&.
The lrzip program will search for the file automatically in one of
three places\&:
.nf
$PWD \- Current Directory
/etc/lrzip
$HOME/\&.lrzip
.PP
Parameters are set in \fBPARAMETER\&=VALUE\fP fashion where any line
beginning with a \fB#\fP or that is blank will be ignored\&.
Parameter values are not case sensitive except where specified\&.
.PP
.SH "CONFIG FILE EXAMPLE"
.nf
# lrzip.conf example file
# Compression Window size in 100MB. Normally selected by program. (-w)
# \fBWINDOW = 20\fP

# Compression Level 1-9 (7 Default). (-L)
# \fBCOMPRESSIONLEVEL = 7\fP

# RZIP Compression Level 1-9 (Default = Compression Level) (-R)
# \fBRZIPLEVEL = 7\fP

# Use -U setting, Unlimited ram. Yes or No
# \fBUNLIMITED = NO\fP

# Compression Method, rzip, gzip, bzip2, bzip3, lzo, or lzma (default), or zpaq. (-n -g -b -l --lzma -z)
# May be overriden by command line compression choice.
# \fBCOMPRESSIONMETHOD = lzma\fP

# LZMA Dictionary Size. 0-40 where
# 0 = 2^12, 1 = 2^12 * 3/2
# 2 = 2^13, 3 = 2^13 * 3/2
# ...
# 38 = 2^31, 39 = 2^31 * 3/2
# 40 = 2^32 - 1;
# \fBDICTIONARYSIZE = 0\fP

# Perform LZ4 Test. Default = YES (-T )
# \fBLZ4TEST = NO\fP

# Set Threshold limit for LZ4 Test. Default 100. Set 1-99 to limit
# \fBTHRESHOLD = 99\fP

# Hash Check on decompression, (-c)
# \fBHASHCHECK = YES\fP

# Show HASH value on Compression even if Verbose is off, YES (-H)
# Set Hash Method 1-MAXHASH
# Default hash is 1 - MD5

# These Message Digests are used to compute and evaluate hash values.

#  0 CRC         - 32 bit CRC
#  1 MD5         - MD5 Checksum
#  2 RIPEMD      - RACE Integrity Primitives Evaluation Message Digest
#  3 SHA256      - Secure Hash Algorithm 2, 256 bit
#  4 SHA384      - Secure Hash Algorithm 2, 384 bit
#  5 SHA512      - Secure Hash Algorithm 2, 512 bit
#  6 SHA3_256    - Secure Hash Algorithm 3, 256 bit
#  7 SHA3_512    - Secure Hash Algorithm 3, 512 bit
#  8 SHAKE128_16 - Extendable Output Function (XOF) 128 bit, 16 byte output
#  9 SHAKE128_32 - Extendable Output Function (XOF) 128 bit, 32 byte output
# 10 SHAKE128_64 - Extendable Output Function (XOF) 128 bit, 64 byte output
# 11 SHAKE256_16 - Extendable Output Function (XOF) 256 bit, 16 byte output
# 12 SHAKE256_32 - Extendable Output Function (XOF) 256 bit, 32 byte output
# 13 SHAKE256_64 - Extendable Output Function (XOF) 256 bit, 64 byte output

# \fBHASH = YES | 1..MAXHASH\fP

# Default output directory (-O)
# \fBOUTPUTDIRECTORY = location\fP

# Verbosity, YES or MAX (v, vv)
# \fBVERBOSITY = max\fP

# Show Progress as file is parsed, YES or no (NO = -q option)
# \fBSHOWPROGRESS = YES\fP

# Set Niceness. 19 is default. -20 to 19 is the allowable range (-N)
# \fBNICE = 19\fP

# Keep broken or damaged output files, YES (-K)
# \fBKEEPBROKEN = YES\fP

# Delete source file after compression (-D)
# this parameter and value are case sensitive
# value must be YES to activate
# \fBDELETEFILES = NO\fP

# Replace existing lrzip file when compressing (-f)
# this parameter and value are case sensitive
# value must be YES to activate
# \fBREPLACEFILE = YES\fP

# Override for Temporary Directory. Only valid when stdin/out or Test is used
# \fBTMPDIR = /tmp\fP

# Whether to use encryption on compression YES, NO (-e)
# OR Encryption Method

#  0 NONE    - No Encryption
#  1 AES 128 - 128 bit AES with 16 Byte key and 16 Byte Initialization Vector
#  2 AES 256 - 256 bit AES with 32 Byte key and 16 Byte Initialization Vector

# \fB ENCRYPT = NO | 1..MAXENC\fP

# Override default LOCALE
# Will control how radix and separators are presented.
# DEFAULT (Current locale), NONE (ignore locale setting), or LOCALE value
# LOCALE = DEFAULT
.fi
.PP
.SH "NOTES"
.PP
Be careful when using \fBDELETEFILES\fP or \fBREPLACEFILE\fP as
no warning will be given and lrzip will simply delete the source
or replace the output file!
.PP
.SH "SEE ALSO"
lrzip(1)
