.\" LRZIP manpage
.\" Comment lines for readability
.\"
.nh
.TH "lrzip-next" 1 "April 2022" "lrzip-next Command Reference" ""
.SH "NAME"
lrzip-next \- a large-file compression program
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.PP
lrzip-next [OPTIONS] <file>
.br
lrzip-next \-d [OPTIONS] <file>
.br
lrunzip [OPTIONS] <file>
.br
lrzcat [OPTIONS] <file>
.br
lrztar [lrzip-next options] <directory>
.br
lrztar \-d [lrzip-next options] <directory>
.br
lrzuntar [lrzip-next options] <directory>
.br
LRZIP=NOCONFIG [lrzip-next|lrunzip] [OPTIONS] <file>
.PP
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP
LRZIP-NEXT is a file compression program designed to do particularly
well on very large files containing long distance redundancy\&.
lrztar is a wrapper for LRZIP-NEXT to simplify compression and decompression
of directories.
.\"
.SH "OPTIONS SUMMARY"
Here is a summary of the options to lrzip-next.
.nf
.B Compression Options:
 \-\-lzma                  lzma compression (default)
 \-b, \-\-bzip2             bzip2 compression
 \-g, \-\-gzip              gzip compression using zlib
 \-l, \-\-lzo               lzo compression (ultra fast)
 \-n, \-\-no-compress       no backend compression - prepare for other compressor
 \-z, \-\-zpaq              zpaq compression (best, extreme compression, extremely slow)
 \-B, \-\-bzip3             bzip3 compression
 \-L, \-\-level level       Set lzma/bzip2/gzip compression level (1-9, default 7)
 \-\-dictsize = ds         Set lzma Dictionary Size for LZMA ds=0 to 40 expressed as 2<<11, 3<<11, 2<<12, 3<<12...2<<31-1
 \-\-zpaqbs = bs           Set ZPAQ Block Size overriding defaults. 1-11, 2^zpaqbs * 1MB
 \-\-bzip3bs = bs          Set BZIP3 Block Size. 1-8, 2^bzip3bs * 1MB
Filtering Options (for all compression modes):
 \-\-x86                   Use x86 filter
 \-\-arm                   Use ARM filter
 \-\-armt                  Use ARMT filter
 \-\-ppc                   Use PPC filter
 \-\-sparc                 Use SPARC filter
 \-\-ia64                  Use IA64 filter
 \-\-delta [=offset]       Use DELTA filter (offset 1..32. 1 default)
Additional Compression Options:
 \-C, \-\-comment [comment] Add a comment up to 64 chars
 \-e, \-\-encrypt[=password] Password protected SHAKE128/AES128 SHAKE256/AES256 encryption on compression
 \-E, \-\-emethod method    Select Encryption method, 1=AES 128, 2=AES 256 bit
 \-D, \-\-delete            delete existing files
 \-f, \-\-force             force overwrite of any existing files
 \-k, \-\-keep-broken       keep broken or damaged output files
 \-o, \-\-outfile filename  specify the output file name and/or path
 \-O, \-\-outdir directory  specify the output directory when -o is not used
 \-S, \-\-suffix suffix     specify compressed suffix (default '.lrz')
Low level Compression Options:
 \-N, \-\-nice-level value  Set nice value to value (default 19)
 \-m, \-\-maxram size       Set maximum available ram in hundreds of MB
                         overrides detected amount of available ram
 \-R, \-\-rzip-level level  Set independent RZIP Compression Level (1-9) for pre-processing (default=compression level)
 \-T, \-\-threshold [limit] Disable LZ4 compressibility testing OR set limit to determine compressibiity (1-99)
 \-U, \-\-unlimited         Use unlimited window size beyond ramsize (potentially much slower)
 \-w, \-\-window size       maximum compression window in hundreds of MB
                         default chosen by heuristic dependent on ram and chosen compression
.B Decompression Options:
 \-d, \-\-decompress        decompress
 \-e, \-f, \-o \-O           Same as above. See Compression Options
 \-t, \-\-test              test compressed file integrity
 \-c, \-\-check             check integrity of file written on decompression
.B General options:
 \-h, \-?, \-\-help          show help
 \-H, \-\-hash[=hash code]  Set hash to compute (default md5) and display hash integrity information
 \-i, \-\-info              show compressed file information
 \-p, \-\-threads value     Set processor count to override number of threads
 \-q, \-\-quiet             don't show compression progress
 \-v[v], \-\-verbose        Increase verbosity
 \-V, \-\-version           show version
.br
LRZIP=NOCONFIG environment variable setting can be used to bypass lrzip.conf.
TMP environment variable will be used for storage of temporary files when needed.
TMPDIR may also be stored in lrzip.conf file.
.br
If no filenames or "-" is specified, stdin/out will be used.
.fi
.\"
.SH "OPTIONS"
.SH "Compression Options:"
.IP "\fB--lzma (default)\fP"
Lzma compression. Default.
.IP "\fB-b | --bzip\fP"
Bzip2 compression. Uses bzip2 compression for the 2nd stage, much like
the original rzip does.
.IP "\fB-g | --gzip\fP"
Gzip compression. Uses gzip compression for the 2nd stage. Uses libz compress
and uncompress functions.
.IP "\fB-l | --lzo\fP"
LZO compression. If this option is set then lrzip-next will use the ultra
fast lzo compression algorithm for the 2nd stage. This mode of compression
gives bzip2 like compression at the speed it would normally take to simply
copy the file, giving excellent compression/time value.
.IP "\fB-n | --rzip\fP"
No 2nd stage compression. If this option is set then lrzip-next will only
perform the long distance redundancy 1st stage compression. While this does
not compress any faster than LZO compression, it produces a smaller file
that then responds better to further compression (by eg another application),
also reducing the compression time substantially.
.IP "\fB-z | --zpaq\fP"
ZPAQ compression. Uses ZPAQ compression which is from the PAQ family of
compressors known for having some of the highest compression ratios possible
but at the cost of being extremely slow on both compress and decompress (4x
slower than lzma which is the default).
.IP "\fB-B | --bzip3\fP"
BZIP3 compression. Uses BZIP3, a statistical compressor and spiritual successor
to BZip2. Features higher compression ratios and good performance. Usually as
fast as BZip2 and provides ratio comparable or better than LZMA.
.IP "\fB-L 1\&.\&.9\fP"
Set the compression level from 1 to 9. The default is to use level 7, which
gives good all round compression. The compression level is also strongly related
to how much memory lrzip-next uses. See the \-w option for details.
.IP "\fB--dictsize=0\&.\&.40\fP (LZMA only)"
Set Dictionary Size for LZMA from 2^12 (4KB) to 2^32-1 (4GB-1). Normally this
option is not useful since lrzip-next will set and sometimes change the dictionary
size depending on the compression level selected and usable ram available. If
sufficient ram is not available, Dictionary size will be reduced until total
overhead * number of threads will fit in ram.
.br
If set, Dictionary sizes will be set as
.br
0:  2 * 2^11, 1:  3 * 2^11; 4,096, 6,144
.br
2:  2 * 2^12, 3:  3 * 2^12; 8,192, 12,288
.br
 ...
.br
38: 2 * 2^30, 39: 3 * 2^30; 2,147,483,648, 3,221,225,472
.br
40: 2 * 2^31 - 1; 4,294,967,295
.IP "\fB--zpaqbs=1\&.\&.11\fP (ZPAQ only)"
Set ZPAQ Block Size from 1 to 11, 2^zpaqbs * 1MB (2MB to 2GB). This parameter
will be passed to the zpaq backend. This value may cause the computed overhead
* number of threads to be greater than available ram, so it may be reduced
possibly along with usable threads.
.IP "\fB--bzip3bs=1\&.\&.8\fP (BZIP3 only)"
Set BZIP3 Block Size from 1 to 8, 2^bzip3bs * 1MB (2MB to 256MB). This parameter
will be passed to the bzip3 backend. This value may cause the computed overhead
* number of threads to be greater than available ram, so it may be reduced
possibly along with usable threads.
.SH "Filtering Options (for all compression modes)"
.IP "\fB--x86\fP"
Unconditionally use x86 filter prior to compression. Works for all
compression modes.
.IP "\fB--arm\fP"
Unconditionally use ARM filter prior to compression. Works for all
compression modes.
.IP "\fB--armt\fP"
Unconditionally use ARMT filter prior to compression. Works for all
compression modes.
.IP "\fB--ppc\fP"
Unconditionally use PPC filter prior to compression. Works for all
compression modes.
.IP "\fB--sparc\fP"
Unconditionally use SPARC filter prior to compression. Works for all
compression modes.
.IP "\fB--ia64\fP"
Unconditionally use IA64 filter prior to compression. Works for all
compression modes.
.IP "\fB--delta\fR [1\&.\&.32]\fP"
Unconditionally use DELTA filter prior to compression. Works for all
compression modes. Delta offset 1 default. Delta offset is set as
1-17, then 32..256 in multiples of 16. e.g. An offset of 18 would be
32, 19:48, 20:64...32:256.
.\" 
.SH "Additional Compression Options:"
.IP "\fB-C | --comment \fR[\fIcomment\fP]"
Add a comment for the archive up to 64 characters.
.IP "\fB-e | --encrypt \fR[\fIpassword\fP]"
Encrypt. This option enables high grade password encryption using a combination
of multiply sha512 hashed password, random salt and aes128 CBC encryption.
Passwords up to 500 characters long are supported, and the encryption mechanism
used virtually guarantees that the same file created with the same password
will never be the same. Furthermore, the password hashing is increased
according to the date the file is encrypted, increasing the number of CPU
cycles required for each password attempt in accordance with Moore's law, thus
making the difficulty of attempting brute force attacks proportional to the
power of modern computers.
.IP
The optional password may be inserted on the command line, however there are
obvious security risks to doing so, such as the cleartext password will be
visible on a screen or persistent in a screen buffer; the cleartext password
will be visible in a process listing, so take care. If the short option \fB-e\fP
is used, there must be no space between the option and the password. e.g.
\fB-epassphrase\fP.
.IP
These options may be used for Encryption, Decryption, or Test under the following
conditions.
.br
If output is to STDOUT, then the option cannot be used during compression.
.br
If input is from STDIN, then the password must be on the command line.
.br
If lrzip-next is embedded in a \fBtar -I lrzip-next [options]\fP command, then
this option cannot be used.
.IP "\fB-E | --emethod\fR[\fIencryption method\fP]"
Select encryption method to use: 1=AES 128 bit, 2=AES 256 bit encryption.
AES 128 uses SHAKE128 hashing for key generation, and AES 256 uses
SHAKE256 hashing.
.IP "\fB-D | --delete\fP"
If this option is specified then lrzip-next will delete the
source file after successful compression or decompression. When this
option is not specified then the source files are not deleted.
.IP "\fB-f | --force\fP"
If this option is not specified (Default) then lrzip-next will not
overwrite any existing files. If you set this option then rzip will
silently overwrite any files as needed.
.IP "\fB-k | --keep-broken\fP"
This option will keep broken or damaged files instead of deleting them.
When compression or decompression is interrupted either by user or error, or
a file decompressed fails an integrity check, it is normally deleted by LRZIP.
.IP "\fB-o | --outfile \fIfilename\fP"
Set the output file name. If this option is not set then
the output file name is chosen based on the input name and the
suffix. The \-o option cannot be used if more than one file name is
specified on the command line.
.IP "\fB-O | --outdir \fIoutput_directory\fP"
Set the output directory for the default filename. This option
cannot be combined with \-o.
.IP "\fB-S | --suffix \fI suffix\fR (default \fB.lrz\fP)"
Set the compression suffix. The default is '.lrz'.
.\"
.SH "Low Level Compression Options:"
.IP "\fB-N | --nice-val \fIvalue\fP"
The default nice value is 19. This option can be used to set the priority
scheduling for the lrzip-next backup or decompression. Valid nice values are
from \-20 to 19. Note this does NOT speed up or slow down compression.
.IP "\fB-m | --maxram \fImaxram\fR"
Specify the maximum system memory in 100MB blocks. Overrides detected ram.
Ex. 40=4GB.
.IP "\fB-R | --rzip-level \fIlevel\fP"
Specify the rzip pre-processing compression level. If not set, will default
to compression level.
.IP "\fB-T | --threshold\fP"
Disables the LZ4 compressibility threshold testing when a slower compression
back-end is used. LZ4 testing is normally performed for the slower back-end
compression of LZMA and ZPAQ. The reasoning is that if it is completely
incompressible by LZ4 then it will also be incompressible by them. Thus if a
block fails to be compressed by the very fast LZ4, lrzip-next will not attempt to
compress that block with the slower compressor, thereby saving time. If this
option is enabled, it will bypass the LZ4 testing and attempt to compress each
block regardless.
.IP "\fB-T | --threshold \fIlimit\fP"
If the value \fBlimit\fP is used, it will test compressibility as a percentage of
chunk size. Limiting chunck compressibility threshold can speed up compression.
If, for example, LZ4_TEST determines a chunk is 99.99% of chunk size, it will
pass the chunk to the compressor even though it is barely compressible. Setting
\fBlimit\fP to a lower value, 95% for example, the chunk will not be passed to
the compressor unless it is at least 5% compression benefit as determined by
LZ4_TEST. Any value from 1-99 is allowed.
.IP "\fB-U | --unlimited\fP"
Unlimited window size\&. If this option is set, and the file being compressed
does not fit into the available ram, lrzip-next will use a moving second buffer
as a "sliding mmap" which emulates having infinite ram. This will provide the
most possible compression in the first rzip stage which can improve the
compression of ultra large files when they're bigger than the available ram.
However it runs progressively slower the larger the difference between ram and
the file size, so is best reserved for when the smallest possible size is
desired on a very large file, and the time taken is not important.
.IP "\fB-w | --window \fIsize\fP"
Set the maximum allowable compression window size to n in hundreds of megabytes.
This is the amount of memory lrzip-next will search during its first stage of
pre-compression and is the main thing that will determine how much benefit
lrzip-next will provide over ordinary compression with the 2nd stage algorithm.
If not set (recommended), the value chosen will be determined by an internal
heuristic in lrzip-next which uses the most memory that is reasonable, without
any hard upper limit. It is limited to 2GB on 32bit machines. lrzip-next will
always reduce the window size to the biggest it can be without running out of
memory.
.\"
.SH "Decompression Options:"
.IP "\fB-d | --decompress\fP"
Decompress. If this option is not used then lrzip-next looks at
the name used to launch the program. If it contains the string
"lrunzip" then the \-d option is automatically set. If it contains the string
"lrzcat" then the \-d \-o \- options are automatically set.
.IP "\fB-e, -E, -f, -o, -O\fP"
Same as above. See \fBCompression Options\fP.
.IP "\fB-t | --test\fP"
This tests the compressed file integrity. It does this by decompressing it
to a temporary file and then deleting it.
.IP "\fB-c | --check\fP"
This option enables integrity checking of the file written to disk on
decompression. All decompression is tested internally in lrzip-next with either
crc32 or md5 hash checking depending on the version of the archive already.
However the file written to disk may be corrupted for other reasons to do with
other userspace problems such as faulty library versions, drivers, hardware
failure and so on. Enabling this option will make lrzip-next perform an md5 hash
check on the file that's written to disk. When the archive has the md5 value
stored in it, it is compared to this. Otherwise it is compared to the value
calculated during decompression. This offers an extra guarantee that the file
written is the same as the original archived.
.\"
.SH "General Options:"
.IP "\fB-h | -? | --help\fP"
Print an options summary page
.IP "\fB-H | --hash\fR \fI[hash code]\fP"
This shows the hash value calculated on compressing or decompressing an
lrzip-next archive. By default all compression has the md5 value calculated and
stored in all archives since version 0.560. On decompression, when a hash
value has been found, it will be calculated and used for integrity checking.
If the hash value is not stored in the archive, it will not be calculated unless
explicitly specified with this option, or check integrity (see below) has been
requested.
.br
Hash values can be 1-13 and are defined as follows:
.br
 0 CRC         - 32 bit CRC
.br
 1 MD5         - MD5 Checksum
.br
 2 RIPEMD      - RACE Integrity Primitives Evaluation Message Digest
.br
 3 SHA256      - Secure Hash Algorithm 2, 256 bit
.br
 4 SHA384      - Secure Hash Algorithm 2, 384 bit
.br
 5 SHA512      - Secure Hash Algorithm 2, 512 bit
.br
 6 SHA3_256    - Secure Hash Algorithm 3, 256 bit
.br
 7 SHA3_512    - Secure Hash Algorithm 3, 512 bit
.br
 8 SHAKE128_16 - Extendable Output Function (XOF) 128 bit, 16 byte output
.br
 9 SHAKE128_32 - Extendable Output Function (XOF) 128 bit, 32 byte output
.br
10 SHAKE128_64 - Extendable Output Function (XOF) 128 bit, 64 byte output
.br
11 SHAKE256_16 - Extendable Output Function (XOF) 256 bit, 16 byte output
.br
12 SHAKE256_32 - Extendable Output Function (XOF) 256 bit, 32 byte output
.br
13 SHAKE256_64 - Extendable Output Function (XOF) 256 bit, 64 byte output
.IP "\fB-i | --info\fP"
This shows information about a compressed file. It shows the compressed size,
the decompressed size, the compression ratio, what compression was used and
what hash checking will be used for internal integrity checking.
Note that the compression mode is detected from the first block only and
it will show no compression used if the first block was incompressible, even
if later blocks were compressible. If verbose options \-v or \-vv are added,
a breakdown of all the internal blocks and progressively more information
pertaining to them will also be shown.
.IP "\fB-p | --threads\ \fIvalue\fP"
Set the number of processor count to determine the number of threads to run.
Normally lrzip-next will scale according to the number of CPUs it detects. Using
this will override the value in case you wish to use less CPUs to either
decrease the load on your machine, or to improve compression. Setting it to
1 will maximise compression but will not attempt to use more than one CPU.
.IP "\fB-q | --quiet\fP"
If this option is specified then lrzip-next will not show the
percentage progress while compressing. Note that compression happens in
bursts with lzma compression which is the default compression. This means
that it will progress very rapidly for short periods and then stop for
long periods.
.IP "\fB-v[v] | --verbose\fP"
Increases verbosity. \-vv will print more messages than \-v.
.IP "\fB-V | --version\fP"
Print the lrzip-next version number.
.\"
.SH "INSTALLATION"
"make install" or just install lrzip-next somewhere in your search path.
.SH "COMPRESSION ALGORITHM"
LRZIP operates in two stages. The first stage finds and encodes large chunks of
duplicated data over potentially very long distances in the input file. The
second stage is to use a compression algorithm to compress the output of the
first stage. The compression algorithm can be chosen to be optimised for extreme
size (zpaq), size (lzma - default or bzip3), speed (lzo), legacy (bzip2 or gzip)
or can be omitted entirely doing only the first stage. A one stage only compressed
file can almost always improve both the compression size and speed done by a
subsequent compression program.
.PP
The key difference between lrzip-next and other well known compression
algorithms is its ability to take advantage of very long distance
redundancy. The well known deflate algorithm used in gzip uses a
maximum history buffer of 32k. The block sorting algorithm used in
bzip2 is limited to 900k of history. The history buffer in lrzip-next can be
any size long, not even limited by available ram.
.PP
It is quite common these days to need to compress files that contain
long distance redundancies. For example, when compressing a set of
home directories several users might have copies of the same file, or
of quite similar files. It is also common to have a single file that
contains large duplicated chunks over long distances, such as pdf
files containing repeated copies of the same image. Most compression
programs won't be able to take advantage of this redundancy, and thus
might achieve a much lower compression ratio than lrzip-next can achieve.
.\"
.SH "FILES"
.PP
LRZIP recognises a configuration file that contains default settings.
This configuration is searched for in the current directory, /etc/lrzip,
and $HOME/.lrzip. The configuration filename must be \fBlrzip.conf\fP.
.SH "ENVIRONMENT"
By default, lrzip-next will search for and use a configuration file, lrzip.conf.
If the user wishes to bypass the file, a startup ENV variable may be set.
.br
.B LRZIP =
.I "NOCONFIG "
.B "[lrzip-next|lrunzip]"
[OPTIONS] <file>
.br
which will force lrzip-next to ignore the configuration file.
.\"
.SH "HISTORY - Notes on rzip by Andrew Tridgell"
.PP
The ideas behind rzip were first implemented in 1998 while I was
working on rsync. That version was too slow to be practical, and was
replaced by this version in 2003.
LRZIP was created by the desire to have better compression and/or speed
by Con Kolivas on blending the lzma and lzo compression algorithms with
the rzip first stage, and extending the compression windows to scale
with increasing ram sizes.
.\"
.SH "BUGS"
Nil known.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
lrzip.conf(5),
lrunzip(1),
lrzcat(1),
lrztar(1),
lrzuntar(1),
bzip2(1),
gzip(1),
lzop(1),
rzip(1),
bzip3(1),
zip(1)
.\"
.SH "AUTHOR and CREDITS"
.br
lrzip was conceived and written by Con Kolivas
.br
lrzip-next is maintained by Peter Hyman.
.br
rzip was written by Andrew Tridgell.
.br
lzma was written by Igor Pavlov.
.br
lzo was written by Markus Oberhumer.
.br
zpaq was written by Matt Mahoney.
.br
bzip3 was written by Kamila Szewczyk.
.br
Peter Hyman added informational output, updated LZMA SDK,
updated ZPAQ SDK added lzma multi-threading capabilities,
and added filtering for all compression modes. All features in lrzip-next.
.br
If you wish to report a problem, or make a suggestion, then please email
Peter Hyman, pete@peterhyman.com
.br
lrzip-next is released under the GNU General Public License version 2.
Please see the file COPYING for license details.
