.\" LRZIP manpage
.\" Comment lines for readability
.\"
.TH "lrzip" 1 "May 2020" "lrzip Command Reference" ""
.SH "NAME"
lrzip \- a large-file compression program
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.PP
lrzip [OPTIONS] <file>
.br
lrzip \-d [OPTIONS] <file>
.br
lrunzip [OPTIONS] <file>
.br
lrzcat [OPTIONS] <file>
.br
lrztar [lrzip options] <directory>
.br
lrztar \-d [lrzip options] <directory>
.br
lrzuntar [lrzip options] <directory>
.br
lrz [lrz options] <directory>
.br
LRZIP=NOCONFIG [lrzip|lrunzip] [OPTIONS] <file>
.PP
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP
LRZIP is a file compression program designed to do particularly
well on very large files containing long distance redundancy\&.
lrztar is a wrapper for LRZIP to simplify compression and decompression
of directories.
.\"
.SH "OPTIONS SUMMARY"
Here is a summary of the options to lrzip.
.nf
.B Compression Options:
 \-\-lzma                  lzma compression (default)
 \-b, \-\-bzip2             bzip2 compression
 \-g, \-\-gzip              gzip compression using zlib
 \-l, \-\-lzo               lzo compression (ultra fast)
 \-n, \-\-no-compress       no backend compression - prepare for other compressor
 \-z, \-\-zpaq              zpaq compression (best, extreme compression, extremely slow)
 \-L, \-\-level level       Set lzma/bzip2/gzip compression level (1-9, default 7)
 \-\-dictsize = ds         Set Dictionary Size for LZMA ds=12 to 30 expressed as 2^ds
Filtering Options (for all compression modes):
 \-\-x86                   Use x86 filter
 \-\-arm                   Use ARM filter
 \-\-armt                  Use ARMT filter
 \-\-ppc                   Use PPC filter
 \-\-sparc                 Use SPARC filter
 \-\-ia64                  Use IA64 filter
 \-\-delta [=offset]       Use DELTA filter (offset 1..32. 1 default)
Additional Compression Options:
 \-e, \-\-encrypt[=password] password protected sha512/aes128 encryption on compression
 \-D, \-\-delete            delete existing files
 \-f, \-\-force             force overwrite of any existing files
 \-k, \-\-keep-broken       keep broken or damaged output files
 \-o, \-\-outfile filename  specify the output file name and/or path
 \-O, \-\-outdir directory  specify the output directory when -o is not used
 \-S, \-\-suffix suffix     specify compressed suffix (default '.lrz')
Low level Compression Options:
 \-N, \-\-nice-level value  Set nice value to value (default 19)
 \-m, \-\-maxram size       Set maximum available ram in hundreds of MB
                         overrides detected amount of available ram
 \-T, \-\-threshold [limit] Disable LZO compressibility testing OR set limit to determine compressibiity (1-99)
 \-U, \-\-unlimited         Use unlimited window size beyond ramsize (potentially much slower)
 \-w, \-\-window size       maximum compression window in hundreds of MB
                         default chosen by heuristic dependent on ram and chosen compression
.B Decompression Options:
 \-d, \-\-decompress        decompress
 \-t, \-\-test              test compressed file integrity
 \-c, \-\-check             check integrity of file written on decompression
.B General options:
 \-h, \-?, \-\-help          show help
 \-H, \-\-hash              display md5 hash integrity information
 \-i, \-\-info              show compressed file information
 \-p, \-\-threads value     Set processor count to override number of threads
 \-q, \-\-quiet             don't show compression progress
 \-r, \-\-recursive         operate recursively on directories
 \-v[v], \-\-verbose        Increase verbosity
 \-V, \-\-version           show version
.br
LRZIP=NOCONFIG environment variable setting can be used to bypass lrzip.conf.
TMP environment variable will be used for storage of temporary files when needed.
TMPDIR may also be stored in lrzip.conf file.
.br
If no filenames or "-" is specified, stdin/out will be used.
.fi
.\"
.SH "OPTIONS"
.SH "Compression Options:"
.IP "\fB--lzma (default)\fP"
Lzma compression. Default.
.IP "\fB-b | --bzip\fP"
Bzip2 compression. Uses bzip2 compression for the 2nd stage, much like
the original rzip does.
.IP "\fB-g | --gzip\fP"
Gzip compression. Uses gzip compression for the 2nd stage. Uses libz compress
and uncompress functions.
.IP "\fB-l | --lzo\fP"
LZO compression. If this option is set then lrzip will use the ultra
fast lzo compression algorithm for the 2nd stage. This mode of compression
gives bzip2 like compression at the speed it would normally take to simply
copy the file, giving excellent compression/time value.
.IP "\fB-n | --rzip\fP"
No 2nd stage compression. If this option is set then lrzip will only
perform the long distance redundancy 1st stage compression. While this does
not compress any faster than LZO compression, it produces a smaller file
that then responds better to further compression (by eg another application),
also reducing the compression time substantially.
.IP "\fB-z | --zpaq\fP"
ZPAQ compression. Uses ZPAQ compression which is from the PAQ family of
compressors known for having some of the highest compression ratios possible
but at the cost of being extremely slow on both compress and decompress (4x
slower than lzma which is the default).
.IP "\fB-L 1\&.\&.9\fP"
Set the compression level from 1 to 9. The default is to use level 7, which
gives good all round compression. The compression level is also strongly related
to how much memory lrzip uses. See the \-w option for details.
.IP "\fB--dictsize=12\&.\&.30\fP"
Set Dictionary Size for LZMA from 2^12 (16KB) to 2^30 (1GB). Normally this
option is not useful since lrzip will set and sometimes change the dictionary
size depending on the compression level selected and usable ram available.
.SH "Filtering Options (for all compression modes)"
.IP "\fB--x86\fP"
Unconditionally use x86 filter prior to compression. Works for all
compression modes.
.IP "\fB--arm\fP"
Unconditionally use ARM filter prior to compression. Works for all
compression modes.
.IP "\fB--armt\fP"
Unconditionally use ARMT filter prior to compression. Works for all
compression modes.
.IP "\fB--ppc\fP"
Unconditionally use PPC filter prior to compression. Works for all
compression modes.
.IP "\fB--sparc\fP"
Unconditionally use SPARC filter prior to compression. Works for all
compression modes.
.IP "\fB--ia64\fP"
Unconditionally use IA64 filter prior to compression. Works for all
compression modes.
.IP "\fB--delta\fR [1\&.\&.32]\fP"
Unconditionally use DELTA filter prior to compression. Works for all
compression modes. Delta offset 1 default. Delta offset is set as
1-17, then 32..256 in multiples of 16. e.g. An offset of 18 would be
32, 19:48, 20:64...32:256.
.\" 
.SH "Additional Compression Options:"
.IP "\fB-e | --encrypt \fR[\fIpassword\fP]"
Encrypt. This option enables high grade password encryption using a combination
of multiply sha512 hashed password, random salt and aes128 CBC encryption.
Passwords up to 500 characters long are supported, and the encryption mechanism
used virtually guarantees that the same file created with the same password
will never be the same. Furthermore, the password hashing is increased
according to the date the file is encrypted, increasing the number of CPU
cycles required for each password attempt in accordance with Moore's law, thus
making the difficulty of attempting brute force attacks proportional to the
power of modern computers.
.IP "\fB-D | --delete\fP"
If this option is specified then lrzip will delete the
source file after successful compression or decompression. When this
option is not specified then the source files are not deleted.
.IP "\fB-f | --force\fP"
If this option is not specified (Default) then lrzip will not
overwrite any existing files. If you set this option then rzip will
silently overwrite any files as needed.
.IP "\fB-k | --keep-broken\fP"
This option will keep broken or damaged files instead of deleting them.
When compression or decompression is interrupted either by user or error, or
a file decompressed fails an integrity check, it is normally deleted by LRZIP.
.IP "\fB-o | --outfile \fIfilename\fP"
Set the output file name. If this option is not set then
the output file name is chosen based on the input name and the
suffix. The \-o option cannot be used if more than one file name is
specified on the command line.
.IP "\fB-O | --outdir \fIoutput_directory\fP"
Set the output directory for the default filename. This option
cannot be combined with \-o.
.IP "\fB-S | --suffix \fI suffix\fR (default \fB.lrz\fP)"
Set the compression suffix. The default is '.lrz'.
.\"
.SH "Low Level Compression Options:"
.IP "\fB-N | --nice-val \fIvalue\fP"
The default nice value is 19. This option can be used to set the priority
scheduling for the lrzip backup or decompression. Valid nice values are
from \-20 to 19. Note this does NOT speed up or slow down compression.
.IP "\fB-m | --maxram \fImaxram\fR"
Specify the maximum system memory in 100MB blocks. Overrides detected ram.
Ex. 40=4GB.
.IP "\fB-T | --threshold\fP"
Disables the LZO compressibility threshold testing when a slower compression
back-end is used. LZO testing is normally performed for the slower back-end
compression of LZMA and ZPAQ. The reasoning is that if it is completely
incompressible by LZO then it will also be incompressible by them. Thus if a
block fails to be compressed by the very fast LZO, lrzip will not attempt to
compress that block with the slower compressor, thereby saving time. If this
option is enabled, it will bypass the LZO testing and attempt to compress each
block regardless.
.IP "\fB-T | --threshold limit\fP"
If the value \fBlimit\fP is used, it will test compressibility as a percentage of
chunk size. Limiting chunck compressibility threshold can speed up compression.
If, for example, LZO_TEST determines a chunk is 99.99% of chunk size, it will
pass the chunk to the compressor even though it is barely compressible. Setting
\fBlimit\fP to a lower value, 95% for example, the chunk will not be passed to
the compressor unless it is at least 5% compression benefit as determined by
LZO_TEST. Any value from 1-99 is allowed.
.IP "\fB-U | --unlimited\fP"
Unlimited window size\&. If this option is set, and the file being compressed
does not fit into the available ram, lrzip will use a moving second buffer as a
"sliding mmap" which emulates having infinite ram. This will provide the most
possible compression in the first rzip stage which can improve the compression
of ultra large files when they're bigger than the available ram. However it runs
progressively slower the larger the difference between ram and the file size,
so is best reserved for when the smallest possible size is desired on a very
large file, and the time taken is not important.
.IP "\fB-w | --window \fIsize\fP"
Set the maximum allowable compression window size to n in hundreds of megabytes.
This is the amount of memory lrzip will search during its first stage of
pre-compression and is the main thing that will determine how much benefit lrzip
will provide over ordinary compression with the 2nd stage algorithm. If not set
(recommended), the value chosen will be determined by an internal heuristic in
lrzip which uses the most memory that is reasonable, without any hard upper
limit. It is limited to 2GB on 32bit machines. lrzip will always reduce the
window size to the biggest it can be without running out of memory.
.\"
.SH "Decompression Options:"
.IP "\fB-d | --decompress\fP"
Decompress. If this option is not used then lrzip looks at
the name used to launch the program. If it contains the string
"lrunzip" then the \-d option is automatically set. If it contains the string
"lrzcat" then the \-d \-o \- options are automatically set.
.IP "\fB-t | --test\fP"
This tests the compressed file integrity. It does this by decompressing it
to a temporary file and then deleting it.
.IP "\fB-c | --check\fP"
This option enables integrity checking of the file written to disk on
decompression. All decompression is tested internally in lrzip with either
crc32 or md5 hash checking depending on the version of the archive already.
However the file written to disk may be corrupted for other reasons to do with
other userspace problems such as faulty library versions, drivers, hardware
failure and so on. Enabling this option will make lrzip perform an md5 hash
check on the file that's written to disk. When the archive has the md5 value
stored in it, it is compared to this. Otherwise it is compared to the value
calculated during decompression. This offers an extra guarantee that the file
written is the same as the original archived.
.\"
.SH "General Options:"
.IP "\fB-h | -? | --help\fP"
Print an options summary page
.IP "\fB-H | --hash\fP"
This shows the md5 hash value calculated on compressing or decompressing an
lrzip archive. By default all compression has the md5 value calculated and
stored in all archives since version 0.560. On decompression, when an md5
value has been found, it will be calculated and used for integrity checking.
If the md5 value is not stored in the archive, it will not be calculated unless
explicitly specified with this option, or check integrity (see below) has been
requested.
.IP "\fB-i | --info\fP"
This shows information about a compressed file. It shows the compressed size,
the decompressed size, the compression ratio, what compression was used and
what hash checking will be used for internal integrity checking.
Note that the compression mode is detected from the first block only and
it will show no compression used if the first block was incompressible, even
if later blocks were compressible. If verbose options \-v or \-vv are added,
a breakdown of all the internal blocks and progressively more information
pertaining to them will also be shown.
.IP "\fB-p | --threads\ \fIvalue\fP"
Set the number of processor count to determine the number of threads to run.
Normally lrzip will scale according to the number of CPUs it detects. Using
this will override the value in case you wish to use less CPUs to either
decrease the load on your machine, or to improve compression. Setting it to
1 will maximise compression but will not attempt to use more than one CPU.
.IP "\fB-q | --quiet\fP"
If this option is specified then lrzip will not show the
percentage progress while compressing. Note that compression happens in
bursts with lzma compression which is the default compression. This means
that it will progress very rapidly for short periods and then stop for
long periods.
.IP "\fB-r | --recursive\fP"
If this option is specified, lrzip will recursively enter the directories
specified, compressing or decompressing every file individually in the same
directory. Note for better compression it is recommended to instead combine
files in a tar file rather than compress them separately, either manually
or with the lrztar helper.
.IP "\fB-v[v] | --verbose\fP"
Increases verbosity. \-vv will print more messages than \-v.
.IP "\fB-V | --version\fP"
Print the lrzip version number.
.\"
.SH "INSTALLATION"
"make install" or just install lrzip somewhere in your search path.
.SH "COMPRESSION ALGORITHM"
LRZIP operates in two stages. The first stage finds and encodes large chunks of
duplicated data over potentially very long distances in the input file. The
second stage is to use a compression algorithm to compress the output of the
first stage. The compression algorithm can be chosen to be optimised for extreme
size (zpaq), size (lzma - default), speed (lzo), legacy (bzip2 or gzip) or can
be omitted entirely doing only the first stage. A one stage only compressed file
can almost always improve both the compression size and speed done by a
subsequent compression program.
.PP
The key difference between lrzip and other well known compression
algorithms is its ability to take advantage of very long distance
redundancy. The well known deflate algorithm used in gzip uses a
maximum history buffer of 32k. The block sorting algorithm used in
bzip2 is limited to 900k of history. The history buffer in lrzip can be
any size long, not even limited by available ram.
.PP
It is quite common these days to need to compress files that contain
long distance redundancies. For example, when compressing a set of
home directories several users might have copies of the same file, or
of quite similar files. It is also common to have a single file that
contains large duplicated chunks over long distances, such as pdf
files containing repeated copies of the same image. Most compression
programs won't be able to take advantage of this redundancy, and thus
might achieve a much lower compression ratio than lrzip can achieve.
.\"
.SH "FILES"
.PP
LRZIP recognises a configuration file that contains default settings.
This configuration is searched for in the current directory, /etc/lrzip,
and $HOME/.lrzip. The configuration filename must be \fBlrzip.conf\fP.
.SH "ENVIRONMENT"
By default, lrzip will search for and use a configuration file, lrzip.conf.
If the user wishes to bypass the file, a startup ENV variable may be set.
.br
.B LRZIP =
.I "NOCONFIG "
.B "[lrzip|lrunzip]"
[OPTIONS] <file>
.br
which will force lrzip to ignore the configuration file.
.\"
.SH "HISTORY - Notes on rzip by Andrew Tridgell"
.PP
The ideas behind rzip were first implemented in 1998 while I was
working on rsync. That version was too slow to be practical, and was
replaced by this version in 2003.
LRZIP was created by the desire to have better compression and/or speed
by Con Kolivas on blending the lzma and lzo compression algorithms with
the rzip first stage, and extending the compression windows to scale
with increasing ram sizes.
.\"
.SH "BUGS"
Nil known.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
lrzip.conf(5),
lrunzip(1),
lrzcat(1),
lrztar(1),
lrzuntar(1),
lrz(1),
bzip2(1),
gzip(1),
lzop(1),
rzip(1),
zip(1)
.\"
.SH "AUTHOR and CREDITS"
.br
lrzip is being extensively bastardised from rzip by Con Kolivas.
.br
from 2016 further extensions, enhancements, updates by Peter Hyman.
.br
rzip was written by Andrew Tridgell.
.br
lzma was written by Igor Pavlov.
.br
lzo was written by Markus Oberhumer.
.br
zpaq was written by Matt Mahoney.
.br
Peter Hyman added informational output, updated LZMA SDK,
updated ZPAQ SDK added lzma multi-threading capabilities,
and added filtering for all compression modes.
.br
If you wish to report a problem, or make a suggestion, then please email Con at
kernel@kolivas.org or pete@peterhyman.com
.br
lrzip is released under the GNU General Public License version 2.
Please see the file COPYING for license details.
